Molecular Mechanism of Amyloid Inhibition by Inositol 
Grace Li1,2, Régis Pomès1,2. 
1Hospital for sick children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2University of toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 




One out of eight people aged 65 or older has Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) [1].  With the increasing longevity of our population, AD is approaching epidemic proportions with no cure or preventative therapy available.  A pathological hallmark of Alzheimer’s is the presence of extracellular deposition of amyloid in the brain - fibrillar deposits (plaques) formed from the self-aggregation of the β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide.  Moreover, amyloid composed of other proteins are also found in other neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s, Huntington’s, and prion-related disease.




One therapeutic approach is the development of small-molecule inhibitors of Aβ aggregation.  Recently,  scyllo-inositol has emerged as a promising compound for treatment of AD.  It is one of eight stereoisomers of inositol found in nature and exhibits stereochemistry-dependent inhibition of Aβ fibrillation [2]. Scyllo-inositol is effective at reversing the established disease state as well as preventing the onset of AD-like symptoms in a transgenic mouse model of AD, whereas chiro-inositol is inactive [3].  Currently, scyllo-inositol is in phase two of clinical trials, which evaluates its dose-related safety and efficacy in participants with mild to moderate AD. 


Although scyllo-inositol was successful in treating AD in mice, developing a drug with similar efficacy in humans will likely require subsequent rational design and chemical modification.  However, the molecular mechanism of action of scyllo-inositol is not understood. We hypothesize that inositol act as a drug by directly binding to Aβ and its aggregates.  Formation of amyloid follows a complex aggregation pathway, where different intermediate aggregate species have been implicated in the disease.  These aggregates or oligomers co-exist in equilibrium and vary in size and morphologies - some are small and disordered, while others are large and fibrillar structures [4]. 
Furthermore, the monomer of Aβ is an intrinsically disordered protein in solution, where its conformational equilibrium is characterized by a large ensemble of conformational states.  


Determining the effect of inositol binding with the full-length Aβ protein requires both determining the conformational equilibrium of Aβ, a relatively large disordered non-repetitive peptide, both in the presence and absence of inositol.  Moreover, since we do not know a priori which aggregate species inositol binds to, we must examine the interaction of inositol with various aggregate species.  Simulations involving intrinsically disordered proteins or proteins with multiple aggregate states are extremely CPU-intensive to sufficiently sample their energy landscape, even for a relatively small and simple sequence [5].  Hence, in our study, we instead characterized the binding of inositol with Aβ(16-22), a fragment in the full-length protein that is important for initiating fibril formation [6]. 



Using GROMACS, one of the fastest and efficient molecular dynamics simulation package available, simulation studies of scyllo- and chiro-inositol were performed with (1) single peptides; (2) small aggregates; (3) large ordered aggregates of  KLVFFAE. In addition, control simulations were also done in the absence of inositol. Our systems contain an all-atom description of the protein and inositol in explicit aqueous solution.  We combine conventional molecular dynamics simulations and the approach of running multiple independent replicas to obtain sampling statistics at timescales of microseconds, from which we compute quantitative binding modes, affinities and binding mechanism. Importantly, using SciNet GPC, we were able to obtain cooperative binding modes and bulk binding properties for both stereoisomers with simulation systems at experimentally comparable drug:protein molar ratios (20:1) and concentrations (Figure 1).  


Using the combined computational resources provided by the Center for Computational Biology at SickKids, SHARCNET, and more recently SciNet, we have identified putative binding partners of inositol:  inositol acts on ordered aggregates of Aβ and does not bind the monomer of KLVFFAE, and therefore, not likely to act as a drug on the monomer of Aβ. Furthermore, we have predicted binding modes, binding affinities and generated multiple experimentally-testible hypotheses that are currently being validated in the lab of Dr. Simon Sharpe at the University of Toronto. 











Figure 1:  High spatial probability regions of bound scyllo-inositol on a surface representation of the ordered fibrillar-like oligomer of KLVFFAE. A) and C) Scyllo-inositol (yellow) and chiro-inositol (orange) spatial density; B)+D) An example of a configuration of a cluster of cooperatively bound scyllo-inositol (yellow) and chiro-inositol(orange) molecules overlapped with their spatial densities. 







________________
References 




1. 2010 Alzheimer’s Disease Facts and Figures: http://www.alz.org/documents_custom/report_alzfactsfigures2010.pdf 
2. McLaurin, J., et al., Inositol stereoisomers stabilize an oligomeric aggregate of Alzheimer amyloid β peptide and inhibit aβ -induced toxicity.  J Biol Chem, 2000. 275 (24) pp. 18495-502 
3. McLaurin, J., et al., Cyclohexanehexol inhibitors of Aβ aggregation prevent and reverse Alzheimer's phenotype in a mouse model. Nat Med, 2006. 12(7):pp. 801-8 
4. Bitan, G., et al., Amyloid β-Protein Oligomerization Prenucleation Interactions Revealed by Photo-induced Cross-linking of Unmodified Proteins. J Biol Chem, 2001. 276(37): 35176-35184 
5. Rauscher, S., et al., Simulated Tempering Distributed Replica Sampling, Virtual Replica Exchange, and Other Generalized-Ensemble Methods for Conformational Sampling. J Chem Theory Comput, 2009. 5(10):2640-2662 
6. Balbach, JJ. et al, Amyloid fibril formation by A beta 16-22, a seven-residue fragment of the Alzheimer's beta-amyloid peptide, and structural characterization by solid state NMR. Biochemistry, 2000 vol. 39 (45) pp. 13748-59